madanāturacetaso'nvahaṃ bhavadaṅghridvayadāsyakāmyayā |
yamunātaṭasīmni saikatīṃ taralākṣyo girijāṃ samārcican ||1||
madana-ātura-cetasa:-	with minds overcome by the god of love
anvahaṃ	everyday
bhavat-aṅghri-dvaya-	Thy two feet
dāsya-kāmyayā	to serve desiring
yamunā-taṭa-sīmni	on the Yamunaa banks nearby
saikatīṃ	made of sand (an image)
tarala-ākṣya:	the beautiful eyed ones (girls)
girijāṃ	the goddess Kaatyaayini
samārcican	worshipped
The beautiful eyed girls of Vraja, overcome by Cupid and love for Thee were desirous of serving Thy two lotus feet. To achieve this, everyday, on the banks of Yamunaa, they made an image of sand of goddess Girijaa and worshipped it.
tava nāmakathāratā: samaṃ sudṛśa: prātarupāgatā nadīm |
upahāraśatairapūjayan dayito nandasuto bhavediti ||2||
tava	Thy
nāma-kathā-ratā:	name and deeds always immersed in
samaṃ sudṛśa:	(they) all beautiful eyed (girls)
prāta:-upāgatā	in the morning reaching
nadīm	the river
upahār-śatai:-	with hundreds of offerings
apūjayan	worshipping (prayed)
dayita: nandasuta:	(that) husband, the son of Nanda
bhavet-iti	may become, thus
All the beautiful girls were always immersed in chanting Thy name and narrating Thy deeds. In the morning they would go to the river and worship goddess Girijaa with hundreds of offerings and pray to her that Nanda's son, Krishna, may become their husband.
iti māsamupāhitavratāstaralākṣīrabhivīkṣya tā bhavān |
karuṇāmṛdulo nadītaṭaṃ samayāsīttadanugrahecchayā ||3||
iti māsam-	thus for one month
upāhita-vratā:-	having performed the vows
taralākṣī:-	the beautiful eyed (girls)
abhivīkṣya tā:	seeing them
bhavān	Thou
karuṇā-mṛdula:	by compassion moved
nadītaṭaṃ samayāsīt-	to the river bank went
tat-anugraha-	to bless them
icchayā	desiring
Thou were moved by compassion when Thou saw that the beautiful eyed girls had performed the vows for a month. With a desire to bless them Thou went to the river bank.
niyamāvasitau nijāmbaraṃ taṭasīmanyavamucya tāstadā |
yamunājalakhelanākulā: puratastvāmavalokya lajjitā: ||4||
niyama-avasitau	vows/observances being completed
nija-ambaraṃ	their clothes
taṭa-sīmani-	on the river bank
avamucya tā:-	leaving they
tadā yamunā-jala-	then in the Yamunaa waters
khelana-ākulā:	to sport eager
purata:-tvām-	in front Thee
avalokya	seeing
lajjitā:	felt ashamed
The observances of the vows being completed, they eagerly went to sport in the Yamunaa waters, leaving their robes behind, on the bank. Seeing Thee in front, they felt very ashamed.
trapayā namitānanāsvatho vanitāsvambarajālamantike |
nihitaṃ parigṛhya bhūruho viṭapaṃ tvaṃ tarasā'dhirūḍhavān ||5||
trapayā	out of shame
namita-ānanāsu-	with hung heads
atha: vanitāsu-	then (when) the girls
ambara-jālam-	the heap of clothes
antike nihitaṃ	near by kept
parigṛhya	taking away
bhūruha: viṭapam	a tree's branch
tvaṃ tarasā-	Thou quickly
adhirūḍhavān	climbed up
The girls stood with their heads hung in shame. Thou took away the heap of their clothes lying near by and quickly climbed up the branch of a tree.
iha tāvadupetya nīyatāṃ vasanaṃ va: sudṛśo yathāyatham |
iti narmamṛdusmite tvayi bruvati vyāmumuhe vadhūjanai: ||6||
iha tāvat-	here then
upetya nīyatāṃ	coming take
vasanaṃ va:	clothes you people
sudṛśa:	O beautiful eyed ones
yathāyatham iti	each her own, thus
narma-mṛdu-smite	(with) a soft sweet smile
tvayi bruvati	(when) Thou said
vyamumuhe	they were confused
vadhūjanai:	the girls
Come here, O beautiful eyed ones! Take each one of you your clothes,' Thou said with a soft sweet smile. The girls were confused when they were asked to do so.
ayi jīva ciraṃ kiśora nastava dāsīravaśīkaroṣi kim |
pradiśāmbaramambujekṣaṇetyuditastvaṃ smitameva dattavān ||7||
ayi jīva ciraṃ	O may you live long
kiśora	dear boy
na:-tava dāsī:-	we (are) Thy servants
avaśī-karoṣi kim	teasing us why
pradiśa-ambaram-	give the clothes
ambujekṣaṇa-	O Lotus eyed one!
iti-udita:-	thus being told
tvaṃ smitam-eva	Thou smile only
dattavān	gave
O dear boy! May you live long. We are your hand maids. Why do you tease us thus? O Lotus eyed one! Give us our clothes.' Thus being told, Thou merely gave a smile.
adhiruhya taṭaṃ kṛtāñjalī: pariśuddhā: svagatīrnirīkṣya tā: |
vasanānyakhilānyanugrahaṃ punarevaṃ giramapyadā mudā ||8||
adhiruhya taṭaṃ	climbing up the bank
kṛtāñjalī:	with joined palms
pariśuddhā:	purified (at heart)
svagatī:-	(in Thee) as the sole resort
nirīkṣya tā:	seeing, them (as such)
vasanāni-	clothes
akhilāni-	all
anugrahaṃ	blessings
puna:-evaṃ	again also
giram-api-	words (promise) also
adā mudā	gave (to them) with joy
Thou saw that the girls had come up the bank with joined palms, that they were purified at heart and that they had surrendered to Thee as their sole resort.Thou with joy gave them back all their clothes and also words of promise as blessings.
viditaṃ nanu vo manīṣitaṃ vaditārastviha yogyamuttaram |
yamunāpuline sacandrikā: kṣaṇadā ityabalāstvamūcivān ||9||
viditaṃ nanu	known indeed
va: manīṣitaṃ	(is) your desire
vaditāra:-	(I) will respond
tu-iha	surely here
yogyam-uttaram	proper (befitting) answer
yamunā-puline	on the Yamunaa banks
sacandrikā:	(in) moon lit
kṣaṇadā: iti-	nights, thus
abalā:-	to the girls
tvam-ūcivān	Thou said
Known indeed is your desire to me. I will surely give a proper response, in the moon lit nights on the sand banks of Yamunaa.' Thus Thou said to the girls.
upakarṇya bhavanmukhacyutaṃ madhuniṣyandi vaco mṛgīdṛśa: |
praṇayādayi vīkṣya vīkṣya te vadanābjaṃ śanakairgṛhaṃ gatā: ||10||
upakarṇya	hearing
bhavat-mukha-cyutaṃ	from Thy mouth flowing
madhu-niṣyandi vaca:	honey dripping words
mṛgīdṛśa:	the doe-eyed (girls)
praṇayāt-ayi	with love, O Lord!
vīkṣya vīkṣya	seeing again and again
te vadan-ābjaṃ	Thy lotus face
śanakai:-gṛhaṃ gatā:	slowly home went
O Lord! The doe eyed girls heard Thy honey dripping words flowing from Thy mouth. Looking with love at Thy lotus face again and again they slowly went home.
iti nanvanugṛhya vallavīrvipinānteṣu pureva sañcaran |
karuṇāśiśiro hare hara tvarayā me sakalāmayāvalim ||11||
iti nanu-	thus indeed
anugṛhya	blessing
vallavī:-	the Gopikaas
vipina-anteṣu	in the forests
purā-iva sañcaran	before like moving about
karuṇāśiśira:	O Compassionate and cool
hare	O Hari!
hara tvarayā	put an end to, soon
me sakala-	my all
āmayāvalim	host of ailments
Thus Thou blessed the Gopikaas and continued to roam the woods as before. O Hari! With Thy such cooling compassion, quickly put an end to all my hosts of ailments.